apps/docs/content/docs/adapters/express.mdx, before:

---
title: Express Adapter
description: Vision adapter for Express with tracing, Zod validation, auto-discovery, and services catalog.
---

import { Callout } from 'fumadocs-ui/components/callout'

# Express Adapter

Vision adapter for Express adds zero-config tracing, request/response capture, a service catalog, and Zod-powered validation tooling.

## Installation

```bash
bun add @getvision/adapter-express
# or
npm i @getvision/adapter-express
```

## Quick Start

```ts
import express from 'express'
import { visionMiddleware, enableAutoDiscovery, zValidator } from '@getvision/adapter-express'
import { z } from 'zod'

const app = express()
app.use(express.json())

// Add Vision (dev only)
if (process.env.NODE_ENV !== 'production') {
  app.use(visionMiddleware({ port: 9500 }))
}

// Routes
app.get('/users', (req, res) => res.json([{ id: 1, name: 'Alice' }]))

// Zod validation → schema appears in Service Catalog and API Explorer template
const CreateUser = z.object({
  name: z.string().min(1).describe('Full name'),
  email: z.string().email().describe('Email'),
  age: z.number().int().positive().optional().describe('Age (optional)'),
})
app.post('/users', zValidator('body', CreateUser), (req, res) => res.status(201).json(req.body))

// Auto-discover routes (dev only)
if (process.env.NODE_ENV !== 'production') {
  enableAutoDiscovery(app)
}

app.listen(3000)
```

Open Dashboard at http://localhost:9500.

## Features

- Automatic request tracing (root `http.request` span + child spans)
- Request/response capture (headers, body, params)
- Service Catalog with auto-grouping and manual grouping
- Zod validation with schema templates for API Explorer
- CORS headers for Dashboard (including `X-Vision-Trace-Id`, `X-Vision-Session`)

## Middleware Options

```ts
interface VisionExpressOptions {
  port?: number              // Dashboard port (default: 9500)
  enabled?: boolean          // Enable Vision (default: true)
  maxTraces?: number         // Trace store size (default: 1000)
  maxLogs?: number           // Log store size (default: 10000)
  logging?: boolean          // Console request logs (default: true)
  cors?: boolean             // CORS for Dashboard (default: true)
  service?: {
    name?: string
    version?: string
    description?: string
    integrations?: Record<string, string>
  }
}
```

## Services Catalog

By default, routes are grouped by first path segment.

```ts
// Auto-grouping
enableAutoDiscovery(app)

// Manual grouping with globs
enableAutoDiscovery(app, {
  services: [
    { name: 'Users', description: 'User management', routes: ['/users/*'] },
    { name: 'Auth', routes: ['/auth/*'] },
  ],
})
```

### Registration Order and Nested Routers

- Call `enableAutoDiscovery(app)` only after you register all routes and nested routers.
- For nested modules, mount an `express.Router()` under a base path; define child paths relative to it.

```ts
// routers/analytics.ts
import { Router } from 'express'
import { useVisionSpan } from '@getvision/adapter-express'

const router = Router()
router.get('/dashboard', (req, res) => {
  const withSpan = useVisionSpan()
  const analytics = withSpan('db.select', { 'db.table': 'analytics' }, () => ({ ok: true }))
  res.json({ analytics })
})
export default router
```

```ts
// index.ts
import analytics from './routers/analytics'

app.use('/analytics', analytics) // results in GET /analytics/dashboard

// enable after mounting routers
enableAutoDiscovery(app, { services: [
  { name: 'Users', routes: ['/users', '/users/*'] },
  { name: 'Analytics', routes: ['/analytics', '/analytics/*'] },
]})
```

## Zod Validation

```ts
import { z } from 'zod'
import { zValidator } from '@getvision/adapter-express'

const UpdateUser = z.object({
  name: z.string().min(1).optional().describe('Full name (optional)'),
  email: z.string().email().optional().describe('Email (optional)'),
})

app.put('/users/:id', zValidator('body', UpdateUser), (req, res) => {
  res.json(req.body)
})
```

The adapter attaches the Zod schema to route metadata so API Explorer can generate a commented JSON template. Comments are stripped automatically when sending.

## Custom Spans

Use `useVisionSpan()` to create child spans attached to the current request's root span.

```ts
import { useVisionSpan } from '@getvision/adapter-express'

app.get('/users/:id', (req, res) => {
  const withSpan = useVisionSpan()

  const user = withSpan('db.select', { 'db.system': 'postgresql', 'db.table': 'users' }, () => {
    return { id: 1, name: 'Alice' }
  })

  res.json(user)
})
```

## CORS

When `cors` is enabled (default), the middleware sets:

- `Access-Control-Allow-Origin: *`
- `Access-Control-Allow-Methods: GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, PATCH, OPTIONS`
- `Access-Control-Allow-Headers: Content-Type, Authorization, X-Vision-Trace-Id, X-Vision-Session`
- `Access-Control-Expose-Headers: X-Vision-Trace-Id, X-Vision-Session`

<Callout>
If you proxy the Dashboard or run on a different origin, keep these headers to allow the API Explorer to call your API.
</Callout>

## Troubleshooting

- API Explorer shows “No schema defined” → ensure the route uses `zValidator('body', schema)` and `enableAutoDiscovery(app)` ran after route registration
- Response body shows as string → make sure the adapter is updated (response is now captured before stringify when using `res.json`)
- Spans look flat → ensure you use `useVisionSpan()` to create child spans; they will be parented under `http.request`

## Example

See repository example: `examples/express-basic/`.

Commit message:

feat(docs): update Drizzle and response header configurations for Vision adapters
Enhanced documentation for Vision adapters with updated Drizzle Studio auto-start configuration and instructions. Added details on the `X-Vision-Trace-Id` response header and CORS requirements.

apps/docs/content/docs/adapters/express.mdx, after:

---
title: Express Adapter
description: Vision adapter for Express with tracing, Zod validation, auto-discovery, and services catalog.
---

import { Callout } from 'fumadocs-ui/components/callout'

# Express Adapter

Vision adapter for Express adds zero-config tracing, request/response capture, a service catalog, and Zod-powered validation tooling.

## Installation

```bash
bun add @getvision/adapter-express
# or
npm i @getvision/adapter-express
```

## Quick Start

```ts
import express from 'express'
import { visionMiddleware, enableAutoDiscovery, zValidator } from '@getvision/adapter-express'
import { z } from 'zod'

const app = express()
app.use(express.json())

// Add Vision (dev only)
if (process.env.NODE_ENV !== 'production') {
  app.use(visionMiddleware({ port: 9500 }))
}

// Routes
app.get('/users', (req, res) => res.json([{ id: 1, name: 'Alice' }]))

// Zod validation → schema appears in Service Catalog and API Explorer template
const CreateUser = z.object({
  name: z.string().min(1).describe('Full name'),
  email: z.string().email().describe('Email'),
  age: z.number().int().positive().optional().describe('Age (optional)'),
})
app.post('/users', zValidator('body', CreateUser), (req, res) => res.status(201).json(req.body))

// Auto-discover routes (dev only)
if (process.env.NODE_ENV !== 'production') {
  enableAutoDiscovery(app)
}

app.listen(3000)
```

Open Dashboard at http://localhost:9500.

## Features

- Automatic request tracing (root `http.request` span + child spans)
- Request/response capture (headers, body, params)
- Service Catalog with auto-grouping and manual grouping
- Zod validation with schema templates for API Explorer
- CORS headers for Dashboard (including `X-Vision-Trace-Id`, `X-Vision-Session`)

## Middleware Options

```ts
interface VisionExpressOptions {
  port?: number              // Dashboard port (default: 9500)
  enabled?: boolean          // Enable Vision (default: true)
  maxTraces?: number         // Trace store size (default: 1000)
  maxLogs?: number           // Log store size (default: 10000)
  logging?: boolean          // Console request logs (default: true)
  cors?: boolean             // CORS for Dashboard (default: true)
  service?: {
    name?: string
    version?: string
    description?: string
    integrations?: Record<string, string>
  }
}
```

## Services Catalog

By default, routes are grouped by first path segment.

```ts
// Auto-grouping
enableAutoDiscovery(app)

// Manual grouping with globs
enableAutoDiscovery(app, {
  services: [
    { name: 'Users', description: 'User management', routes: ['/users/*'] },
    { name: 'Auth', routes: ['/auth/*'] },
  ],
})
```

### Registration Order and Nested Routers

- Call `enableAutoDiscovery(app)` only after you register all routes and nested routers.
- For nested modules, mount an `express.Router()` under a base path; define child paths relative to it.

```ts
// routers/analytics.ts
import { Router } from 'express'
import { useVisionSpan } from '@getvision/adapter-express'

const router = Router()
router.get('/dashboard', (req, res) => {
  const withSpan = useVisionSpan()
  const analytics = withSpan('db.select', { 'db.table': 'analytics' }, () => ({ ok: true }))
  res.json({ analytics })
})
export default router
```

```ts
// index.ts
import analytics from './routers/analytics'

app.use('/analytics', analytics) // results in GET /analytics/dashboard

// enable after mounting routers
enableAutoDiscovery(app, { services: [
  { name: 'Users', routes: ['/users', '/users/*'] },
  { name: 'Analytics', routes: ['/analytics', '/analytics/*'] },
]})
```

## Zod Validation

```ts
import { z } from 'zod'
import { zValidator } from '@getvision/adapter-express'

const UpdateUser = z.object({
  name: z.string().min(1).optional().describe('Full name (optional)'),
  email: z.string().email().optional().describe('Email (optional)'),
})

app.put('/users/:id', zValidator('body', UpdateUser), (req, res) => {
  res.json(req.body)
})
```

The adapter attaches the Zod schema to route metadata so API Explorer can generate a commented JSON template. Comments are stripped automatically when sending.

## Custom Spans

Use `useVisionSpan()` to create child spans attached to the current request's root span.

```ts
import { useVisionSpan } from '@getvision/adapter-express'

app.get('/users/:id', (req, res) => {
  const withSpan = useVisionSpan()

  const user = withSpan('db.select', { 'db.system': 'postgresql', 'db.table': 'users' }, () => {
    return { id: 1, name: 'Alice' }
  })

  res.json(user)
})
```

## CORS

## Response Headers

Vision automatically adds the `X-Vision-Trace-Id` header to every response. This header contains the unique trace identifier for correlating client-side metrics with server traces.

<Callout type="warning">
**CORS Required**: To read this header in the browser, you must expose it in your CORS configuration. Vision's built-in CORS handles this automatically, but if you use custom CORS:

```typescript
app.use(cors({
  origin: '*',
  exposedHeaders: ['X-Vision-Trace-Id'], // Note: exposedHeaders for express-cors
}))
```
</Callout>
```

## Request Context

When `cors` is enabled (default), the middleware sets:

- `Access-Control-Allow-Origin: *`
- `Access-Control-Allow-Methods: GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, PATCH, OPTIONS`
- `Access-Control-Allow-Headers: Content-Type, Authorization, X-Vision-Trace-Id, X-Vision-Session`
- `Access-Control-Expose-Headers: X-Vision-Trace-Id, X-Vision-Session`

<Callout>
If you proxy the Dashboard or run on a different origin, keep these headers to allow the API Explorer to call your API.
</Callout>

## Troubleshooting

- API Explorer shows “No schema defined” → ensure the route uses `zValidator('body', schema)` and `enableAutoDiscovery(app)` ran after route registration
- Response body shows as string → make sure the adapter is updated (response is now captured before stringify when using `res.json`)
- Spans look flat → ensure you use `useVisionSpan()` to create child spans; they will be parented under `http.request`

## Example

See repository example: `examples/express-basic/`.
