apps/docs/content/docs/adapters/hono.mdx, before:

---
title: Hono Adapter
description: Seamless integration with Hono framework including automatic route discovery
---

# Hono Adapter

The Hono adapter provides seamless integration with [Hono](https://hono.dev), including automatic route discovery and Zod schema extraction.

## Installation

```bash
bun add @getvision/adapter-hono
```

## Basic Usage

```typescript
import { Hono } from 'hono'
import { visionAdapter, enableAutoDiscovery } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'

const app = new Hono()

app.use('*', visionAdapter())
enableAutoDiscovery(app)

export default app
```

## Configuration

### visionAdapter(options)

```typescript
interface VisionHonoOptions {
  enabled?: boolean        // Enable/disable Vision (default: true)
  port?: number           // Dashboard port (default: 9500)
  maxTraces?: number      // Max traces to store (default: 1000)
  logging?: boolean       // Enable console logs (default: true)
  
  // Service metadata
  name?: string           // Service name (auto-detected from package.json)
  service?: {
    name?: string
    version?: string
    description?: string
    integrations?: Record<string, string>
  }
}
```

### Example

```typescript
app.use('*', visionAdapter({
  port: 9500,
  maxTraces: 5000,
  logging: process.env.NODE_ENV === 'development',
  service: {
    name: 'my-api',
    version: '1.0.0',
    description: 'My awesome API',
    integrations: {
      database: process.env.DATABASE_URL,
      redis: process.env.REDIS_URL,
    },
  },
}))
```

## Zod Integration

Use Vision's monkey-patched `zValidator` to enable automatic schema extraction:

```typescript
import { zValidator } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'
import { z } from 'zod'

const schema = z.object({
  name: z.string().describe('User name'),
  email: z.string().email().describe('User email'),
})

app.post('/users', zValidator('json', schema), (c) => {
  const data = c.req.valid('json')
  // ...
})
```

Vision will automatically:
- Extract the Zod schema
- Generate JSON templates with comments
- Show field types and descriptions in the dashboard

## Custom Spans

Track custom operations with `useVisionSpan()`:

```typescript
import { useVisionSpan } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'

app.get('/users', async (c) => {
  const withSpan = useVisionSpan()
  
  // Database query
  const users = withSpan('db.query', {
    'db.system': 'postgresql',
    'db.table': 'users',
  }, async () => {
    return await db.select().from(users).all()
  })
  
  // External API call
  const enriched = withSpan('http.request', {
    'http.url': 'https://api.example.com/enrich',
    'http.method': 'POST',
  }, async () => {
    return await fetch('https://api.example.com/enrich', {
      method: 'POST',
      body: JSON.stringify(users),
    })
  })
  
  return c.json(enriched)
})
```

## Context Access

Get Vision instance and trace ID in your handlers:

```typescript
import { getVisionContext } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'

app.get('/debug', (c) => {
  const { vision, traceId } = getVisionContext()
  
  console.log('Current trace:', traceId)
  
  return c.json({ traceId })
})
```

## Auto-Discovery

Enable automatic route discovery:

```typescript
import { enableAutoDiscovery } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'

// After adding visionAdapter middleware
enableAutoDiscovery(app)

// Routes defined after this will be auto-discovered
app.get('/users', handler)
app.post('/users', handler)
```

Vision will automatically detect:
- HTTP methods (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, etc.)
- Route paths (including dynamic params like `/users/:id`)
- Handler names
- Zod schemas from `zValidator`

### Registration Order and Mounted Sub-Apps

- Call `enableAutoDiscovery(app)` right after `visionAdapter()` and before you start defining routes.
- The adapter now also captures routes of mounted sub-apps via `app.route('/base', child)`. Define child routes relative to the mount point.

```ts
// parent.ts
import { Hono } from 'hono'
import { visionAdapter, enableAutoDiscovery } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'
import analytics from './analytics' // exports a Hono app

const app = new Hono()
app.use('*', visionAdapter())
enableAutoDiscovery(app) // enable first

// define routes and mount sub-apps after discovery is enabled
app.get('/users', handler)
app.route('/analytics', analytics) // child defines '/dashboard' -> becomes '/analytics/dashboard'

export default app
```

```ts
// analytics.ts (sub-app)
import { Hono } from 'hono'
const analytics = new Hono()
analytics.get('/dashboard', (c) => c.json({ ok: true }))
export default analytics
```

## Drizzle Studio Integration

Launch Drizzle Studio directly from Vision dashboard:

```typescript
import { launchDrizzleStudio } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'
import { db } from './db'

// Optionally launch on startup
if (process.env.NODE_ENV === 'development') {
  launchDrizzleStudio(db)
}
```

## Complete Example

```typescript
import { serve } from '@hono/node-server'
import { Hono } from 'hono'
import { z } from 'zod'
import { 
  visionAdapter, 
  enableAutoDiscovery, 
  useVisionSpan,
  zValidator 
} from '@getvision/adapter-hono'
import { db } from './db'
import { users } from './db/schema'

const app = new Hono()

// Vision setup
app.use('*', visionAdapter({
  service: {
    name: 'my-api',
    version: '1.0.0',
  },
}))

enableAutoDiscovery(app)

// Schemas
const createUserSchema = z.object({
  name: z.string().min(1).describe('User full name'),
  email: z.string().email().describe('User email address'),
})

// Routes
app.get('/users', async (c) => {
  const withSpan = useVisionSpan()
  
  const allUsers = withSpan('db.query', {
    'db.table': 'users',
  }, () => {
    return db.select().from(users).all()
  })
  
  return c.json(allUsers)
})

app.post('/users', 
  zValidator('json', createUserSchema),
  async (c) => {
    const body = c.req.valid('json')
    const withSpan = useVisionSpan()
    
    const newUser = withSpan('db.insert', {
      'db.table': 'users',
    }, () => {
      return db.insert(users).values(body).returning().get()
    })
    
    return c.json(newUser, 201)
  }
)

serve(app)
```

## Next Steps

- [API Explorer](/docs/features/api-explorer)
- [Deployment](/docs/deployment)

Commit message:

feat(docs): update Drizzle and response header configurations for Vision adapters
Enhanced documentation for Vision adapters with updated Drizzle Studio auto-start configuration and instructions. Added details on the `X-Vision-Trace-Id` response header and CORS requirements.

apps/docs/content/docs/adapters/hono.mdx, after:

---
title: Hono Adapter
description: Seamless integration with Hono framework including automatic route discovery
---

# Hono Adapter

The Hono adapter provides seamless integration with [Hono](https://hono.dev), including automatic route discovery and Zod schema extraction.

## Installation

```bash
bun add @getvision/adapter-hono
```

## Basic Usage

```typescript
import { Hono } from 'hono'
import { visionAdapter, enableAutoDiscovery } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'

const app = new Hono()

app.use('*', visionAdapter())
enableAutoDiscovery(app)

export default app
```

## Configuration

### visionAdapter(options)

```typescript
interface VisionHonoOptions {
  enabled?: boolean        // Enable/disable Vision (default: true)
  port?: number           // Dashboard port (default: 9500)
  maxTraces?: number      // Max traces to store (default: 1000)
  logging?: boolean       // Enable console logs (default: true)
  
  // Service metadata
  name?: string           // Service name (auto-detected from package.json)
  service?: {
    name?: string
    version?: string
    description?: string
    integrations?: Record<string, string>
  }
}
```

### Example

```typescript
app.use('*', visionAdapter({
  port: 9500,
  maxTraces: 5000,
  logging: process.env.NODE_ENV === 'development',
  service: {
    name: 'my-api',
    version: '1.0.0',
    description: 'My awesome API',
    integrations: {
      database: process.env.DATABASE_URL,
      redis: process.env.REDIS_URL,
    },
  },
}))
```

## Zod Integration

Use Vision's monkey-patched `zValidator` to enable automatic schema extraction:

```typescript
import { zValidator } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'
import { z } from 'zod'

const schema = z.object({
  name: z.string().describe('User name'),
  email: z.string().email().describe('User email'),
})

app.post('/users', zValidator('json', schema), (c) => {
  const data = c.req.valid('json')
  // ...
})
```

Vision will automatically:
- Extract the Zod schema
- Generate JSON templates with comments
- Show field types and descriptions in the dashboard

## Custom Spans

Track custom operations with `useVisionSpan()`:

```typescript
import { useVisionSpan } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'

app.get('/users', async (c) => {
  const withSpan = useVisionSpan()
  
  // Database query
  const users = withSpan('db.query', {
    'db.system': 'postgresql',
    'db.table': 'users',
  }, async () => {
    return await db.select().from(users).all()
  })
  
  // External API call
  const enriched = withSpan('http.request', {
    'http.url': 'https://api.example.com/enrich',
    'http.method': 'POST',
  }, async () => {
    return await fetch('https://api.example.com/enrich', {
      method: 'POST',
      body: JSON.stringify(users),
    })
  })
  
  return c.json(enriched)
})
```

## Response Headers

Vision automatically adds the `X-Vision-Trace-Id` header to every response. This header contains the unique trace identifier for correlating client-side metrics with server traces.

<Callout type="warning">
**CORS Required**: To read this header in the browser, you must expose it in your CORS configuration:

```typescript
app.use('*', cors({
  origin: '*',
  exposeHeaders: ['X-Vision-Trace-Id'],
}))
```
</Callout>
```

## Context Access

Get Vision instance and trace ID in your handlers:

```typescript
import { getVisionContext } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'

app.get('/debug', (c) => {
  const { vision, traceId } = getVisionContext()
  
  console.log('Current trace:', traceId)
  
  return c.json({ traceId })
})
```

## Auto-Discovery

Enable automatic route discovery:

```typescript
import { enableAutoDiscovery } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'

// After adding visionAdapter middleware
enableAutoDiscovery(app)

// Routes defined after this will be auto-discovered
app.get('/users', handler)
app.post('/users', handler)
```

Vision will automatically detect:
- HTTP methods (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, etc.)
- Route paths (including dynamic params like `/users/:id`)
- Handler names
- Zod schemas from `zValidator`

### Registration Order and Mounted Sub-Apps

- Call `enableAutoDiscovery(app)` right after `visionAdapter()` and before you start defining routes.
- The adapter now also captures routes of mounted sub-apps via `app.route('/base', child)`. Define child routes relative to the mount point.

```ts
// parent.ts
import { Hono } from 'hono'
import { visionAdapter, enableAutoDiscovery } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'
import analytics from './analytics' // exports a Hono app

const app = new Hono()
app.use('*', visionAdapter())
enableAutoDiscovery(app) // enable first

// define routes and mount sub-apps after discovery is enabled
app.get('/users', handler)
app.route('/analytics', analytics) // child defines '/dashboard' -> becomes '/analytics/dashboard'

export default app
```

```ts
// analytics.ts (sub-app)
import { Hono } from 'hono'
const analytics = new Hono()
analytics.get('/dashboard', (c) => c.json({ ok: true }))
export default analytics
```

## Drizzle Studio Integration

Vision can automatically launch Drizzle Studio when configured:

```typescript
app.use('*', visionAdapter({
  drizzle: {
    autoStart: true,  // Auto-start Drizzle Studio
    port: 4983,
  },
}))
```

When Drizzle is detected in your project, Vision will:
- Display a Drizzle Studio button in the dashboard
- Auto-start the studio if `autoStart: true` is set
- Use the specified port (default: 4983)

## Complete Example

```typescript
import { serve } from '@hono/node-server'
import { Hono } from 'hono'
import { z } from 'zod'
import { 
  visionAdapter, 
  enableAutoDiscovery, 
  useVisionSpan,
  zValidator 
} from '@getvision/adapter-hono'
import { db } from './db'
import { users } from './db/schema'

const app = new Hono()

// Vision setup
app.use('*', visionAdapter({
  service: {
    name: 'my-api',
    version: '1.0.0',
  },
}))

enableAutoDiscovery(app)

// Schemas
const createUserSchema = z.object({
  name: z.string().min(1).describe('User full name'),
  email: z.string().email().describe('User email address'),
})

// Routes
app.get('/users', async (c) => {
  const withSpan = useVisionSpan()
  
  const allUsers = withSpan('db.query', {
    'db.table': 'users',
  }, () => {
    return db.select().from(users).all()
  })
  
  return c.json(allUsers)
})

app.post('/users', 
  zValidator('json', createUserSchema),
  async (c) => {
    const body = c.req.valid('json')
    const withSpan = useVisionSpan()
    
    const newUser = withSpan('db.insert', {
      'db.table': 'users',
    }, () => {
      return db.insert(users).values(body).returning().get()
    })
    
    return c.json(newUser, 201)
  }
)

serve(app)
```

## Next Steps

- [API Explorer](/docs/features/api-explorer)
- [Deployment](/docs/deployment)
