apps/docs/content/docs/api-reference.mdx, before:

---
title: API Reference
description: Complete API reference for Vision Core and adapters
---

# API Reference

Complete API reference for Vision Core and adapters.

## @getvision/core

Core Vision functionality - traces, spans, and the dashboard server.

### `VisionCore`

Main Vision instance that manages traces and serves the dashboard.

```typescript
import { VisionCore } from '@getvision/core'

const vision = new VisionCore({
  port: 9500,        // Dashboard port
  maxTraces: 1000,   // Max traces to store
})
```

#### Options

```typescript
interface VisionOptions {
  port?: number           // Dashboard port (default: 9500)
  maxTraces?: number      // Max traces in memory (default: 1000)
}
```

#### Methods

**`vision.createTrace(metadata)`**

Create a new trace:

```typescript
const trace = vision.createTrace({
  method: 'GET',
  path: '/users',
  timestamp: Date.now(),
})
```

**`vision.addSpan(traceId, span)`**

Add span to trace:

```typescript
vision.addSpan(traceId, {
  name: 'db.query',
  startTime: Date.now(),
  duration: 50,
  attributes: {
    'db.table': 'users',
  },
})
```

**`vision.completeTrace(traceId, metadata)`**

Complete a trace:

```typescript
vision.completeTrace(traceId, {
  statusCode: 200,
  duration: 150,
  response: { data: '...' },
})
```

**`vision.start()`**

Start the dashboard server:

```typescript
await vision.start()
console.log('Vision running at http://localhost:9500')
```

---

## @getvision/adapter-hono

Hono framework adapter with auto-discovery.

### `visionAdapter(options)`

Middleware for Hono apps:

```typescript
import { visionAdapter } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'

app.use('*', visionAdapter({
  enabled: true,
  port: 9500,
  maxTraces: 1000,
  service: {
    name: 'my-api',
    version: '1.0.0',
  },
}))
```

#### Options

```typescript
interface VisionHonoOptions {
  enabled?: boolean        // Enable Vision (default: true)
  port?: number           // Dashboard port (default: 9500)
  maxTraces?: number      // Max traces (default: 1000)
  logging?: boolean       // Console logs (default: true)
  
  // Service metadata
  service?: {
    name?: string         // Service name
    version?: string      // Service version
    description?: string  // Service description
    integrations?: Record<string, string>  // Integrations (DB, Redis, etc.)
  }
}
```

### `enableAutoDiscovery(app, options?)`

Enable automatic route discovery:

```typescript
import { enableAutoDiscovery } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'

enableAutoDiscovery(app, {
  services: [
    {
      name: 'Users',
      description: 'User management',
      routes: [/* manual routes */],
    },
  ],
})
```

### `useVisionSpan()`

Create custom spans in route handlers:

```typescript
import { useVisionSpan } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'

app.get('/users', async (c) => {
  const withSpan = useVisionSpan()
  
  const users = withSpan('db.query', {
    'db.table': 'users',
  }, async () => {
    return await db.select().from(users).all()
  })
  
  return c.json(users)
})
```

**Parameters:**
- `name: string` - Span name
- `attributes: Record<string, any>` - Span attributes
- `operation: () => T | Promise<T>` - Operation to track

**Returns:** Result of the operation

### `getVisionContext()`

Get current Vision context:

```typescript
import { getVisionContext } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'

app.get('/debug', (c) => {
  const { vision, traceId } = getVisionContext()
  return c.json({ traceId })
})
```

**Returns:**
```typescript
interface VisionContext {
  vision: VisionCore  // Vision instance
  traceId: string     // Current trace ID
}
```

### `zValidator(target, schema, hook?)`

Monkey-patched zValidator that stores schema for Vision:

```typescript
import { zValidator } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'
import { z } from 'zod'

const schema = z.object({
  name: z.string().describe('User name'),
})

app.post('/users', zValidator('json', schema), handler)
```

Same API as `@hono/zod-validator`, but stores schema for auto-documentation.

### `launchDrizzleStudio(db, port?)`

Launch Drizzle Studio from Vision:

```typescript
import { launchDrizzleStudio } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'

launchDrizzleStudio(db, 4983)
```

---

## Types

### `Trace`

```typescript
interface Trace {
  id: string
  timestamp: number
  duration?: number
  metadata?: {
    method?: string
    path?: string
    statusCode?: number
    request?: any
    response?: any
  }
  spans: Span[]
}
```

### `Span`

```typescript
interface Span {
  id: string
  traceId: string
  parentId?: string
  name: string
  startTime: number
  duration?: number
  attributes?: Record<string, any>
}
```

### `RouteMetadata`

```typescript
interface RouteMetadata {
  method: string
  path: string
  handler?: string
  schema?: any
  service?: string
}
```

## Next Steps

- [Quickstart](/docs/quickstart)
- [Hono Adapter](/docs/adapters/hono)

Commit message:

feat(docs): update Drizzle and response header configurations for Vision adapters
Enhanced documentation for Vision adapters with updated Drizzle Studio auto-start configuration and instructions. Added details on the `X-Vision-Trace-Id` response header and CORS requirements.

apps/docs/content/docs/api-reference.mdx, after:

---
title: API Reference
description: Complete API reference for Vision Core and adapters
---

# API Reference

Complete API reference for Vision Core and adapters.

## @getvision/core

Core Vision functionality - traces, spans, and the dashboard server.

### `VisionCore`

Main Vision instance that manages traces and serves the dashboard.

```typescript
import { VisionCore } from '@getvision/core'

const vision = new VisionCore({
  port: 9500,        // Dashboard port
  maxTraces: 1000,   // Max traces to store
})
```

#### Options

```typescript
interface VisionOptions {
  port?: number           // Dashboard port (default: 9500)
  maxTraces?: number      // Max traces in memory (default: 1000)
}
```

#### Methods

**`vision.createTrace(metadata)`**

Create a new trace:

```typescript
const trace = vision.createTrace({
  method: 'GET',
  path: '/users',
  timestamp: Date.now(),
})
```

**`vision.addSpan(traceId, span)`**

Add span to trace:

```typescript
vision.addSpan(traceId, {
  name: 'db.query',
  startTime: Date.now(),
  duration: 50,
  attributes: {
    'db.table': 'users',
  },
})
```

**`vision.completeTrace(traceId, metadata)`**

Complete a trace:

```typescript
vision.completeTrace(traceId, {
  statusCode: 200,
  duration: 150,
  response: { data: '...' },
})
```

**`vision.start()`**

Start the dashboard server:

```typescript
await vision.start()
console.log('Vision running at http://localhost:9500')
```

---

## @getvision/adapter-hono

Hono framework adapter with auto-discovery.

### `visionAdapter(options)`

Middleware for Hono apps:

```typescript
import { visionAdapter } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'

app.use('*', visionAdapter({
  enabled: true,
  port: 9500,
  maxTraces: 1000,
  service: {
    name: 'my-api',
    version: '1.0.0',
  },
}))
```

#### Options

```typescript
interface VisionHonoOptions {
  enabled?: boolean        // Enable Vision (default: true)
  port?: number           // Dashboard port (default: 9500)
  maxTraces?: number      // Max traces (default: 1000)
  logging?: boolean       // Console logs (default: true)
  
  // Service metadata
  service?: {
    name?: string         // Service name
    version?: string      // Service version
    description?: string  // Service description
    integrations?: Record<string, string>  // Integrations (DB, Redis, etc.)
  }
}
```

### `enableAutoDiscovery(app, options?)`

Enable automatic route discovery:

```typescript
import { enableAutoDiscovery } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'

enableAutoDiscovery(app, {
  services: [
    {
      name: 'Users',
      description: 'User management',
      routes: [/* manual routes */],
    },
  ],
})
```

### `useVisionSpan()`

Create custom spans in route handlers:

```typescript
import { useVisionSpan } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'

app.get('/users', async (c) => {
  const withSpan = useVisionSpan()
  
  const users = withSpan('db.query', {
    'db.table': 'users',
  }, async () => {
    return await db.select().from(users).all()
  })
  
  return c.json(users)
})
```

**Parameters:**
- `name: string` - Span name
- `attributes: Record<string, any>` - Span attributes
- `operation: () => T | Promise<T>` - Operation to track

**Returns:** Result of the operation

### `getVisionContext()`

Get current Vision context:

```typescript
import { getVisionContext } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'

app.get('/debug', (c) => {
  const { vision, traceId } = getVisionContext()
  return c.json({ traceId })
})
```

**Returns:**
```typescript
interface VisionContext {
  vision: VisionCore  // Vision instance
  traceId: string     // Current trace ID
}
```

### `zValidator(target, schema, hook?)`

Monkey-patched zValidator that stores schema for Vision:

```typescript
import { zValidator } from '@getvision/adapter-hono'
import { z } from 'zod'

const schema = z.object({
  name: z.string().describe('User name'),
})

app.post('/users', zValidator('json', schema), handler)
```

Same API as `@hono/zod-validator`, but stores schema for auto-documentation.

### Drizzle Configuration

Configure automatic Drizzle Studio launch in the vision adapter:

```typescript
app.use('*', visionAdapter({
  drizzle: {
    autoStart: true,  // Auto-start Drizzle Studio
    port: 4983,       // Port for Drizzle Studio (optional, default: 4983)
  },
}))
```

When Drizzle is detected in your project, Vision will display a Drizzle Studio button in the dashboard and automatically start it if configured.

---

## Types

### `Trace`

```typescript
interface Trace {
  id: string
  timestamp: number
  duration?: number
  metadata?: {
    method?: string
    path?: string
    statusCode?: number
    request?: any
    response?: any
  }
  spans: Span[]
}
```

### `Span`

```typescript
interface Span {
  id: string
  traceId: string
  parentId?: string
  name: string
  startTime: number
  duration?: number
  attributes?: Record<string, any>
}
```

### `RouteMetadata`

```typescript
interface RouteMetadata {
  method: string
  path: string
  handler?: string
  schema?: any
  service?: string
}
```

## Next Steps

- [Quickstart](/docs/quickstart)
- [Hono Adapter](/docs/adapters/hono)
